= Introduction
Toby Twigger <tobytwigger1@gmail.com>
:description: An introduction to developing a module with the SDK
:keywords: setup, new module, create

== Introduction

Modules are what allows the portal to be so flexible in its uses. They
provide the main functionality of the portal from a user viewpoint.
Although the portal comes with a few basic modules, any module can be
made to extend the functionality.

In this documentation, we will explore how modules are designed and
built, and introduce you to a number of tools for further integrating
your module with the portal framework.

Read on for an introduction to what modules are, how they are loaded and
the features they can use, or continue to the next page to get started
making your own module.

== What is a module?

In essence, a module is simply a Laravel app which has two main routes.
These can be thought of as an admin side and a participant side.

Take, for example, a module which allows you to upload files. Its user side would show all the files belonging to that user, and allow
a user to upload a new one. An admin side, however, would probably show
all the files uploaded to the module and allow their status to be
changed, them to be downloaded etc. Using laravel, making something like
this is a breeze.

Of course, a real module would probably have an API too, as well as many
more customizable features. This module is then published with composer,
and can be pulled into any portal to be used.

To further understand how a module is used in the portal to provide functionality to users, check out the portal documentation.

== How does a module integrate?

So we've got a couple of pages which allow us to do something like
upload and view files, and possibly an API and some settings too. How do
we let the portal know how to use the module and let users create many
instances of our module to be used in different services?

It's as simple as using our service provider! All packages have a
service provider, which tells Laravel what your package does and how to
use it. We utilise this container information to register your module.
For example, we will register any filters your module defines, register
that the module exists with a name and description, and we'll define the
permissions the module makes use of.

To save and retrieve this information, we use the SDK. The SDK allows us
to register all this information, and provides us with helpful
interfaces and methods to make building the features for the portal
easy. For example, we provide an abstract filter class, so you only have
to implement a couple of methods to make your filter work!

The portal, the playground or any other frontend can then retrieve this
information by also using the SDK and do with it what it wants. The
playground will get all modules from the SDK, which will be returned as
a 'Module' class, which is created by the SDK when your service provider
is booted. Neat, huh?

The below shows how the communication works in an example of something
like the playground or portal wanting a list of all modules that're
available to it.

image::sdk-architecture.png[]

In this way, we can create services using your module. When someone
opens your module as part of a service, we redirect them to a route we
automatically define for you (so from the modules point of view, it's
just the root url '/'). We load the current module instance, service etc
and let your module define what the user sees and can do.

== What does the SDK allow us to do?

The rest of this documentation will go through these features in more
depth. As well as the features listed below, which are the things we
feel modules will use most often, any module is welcome to use any part
of the SDK. For example, a module could be made that creates new
services by using the SDK like the portal does! For more information
about these additional features, see the xref:support:components:index.adoc[component reference].
